In this lecture, you'll learn about network redundancy. You see in the diagram on the left on this
slide, we've got an example network and there's no redundancy at all in this network.
Everything is a single point of failure.
Looking at it from the enterprise point of view, you can see where I put in the red line, that shows the demarcation
point between the enterprise and the service provider. The SP router is the service provider router, R1 is the
enterprise WAN edge, Wide Area Network edge, router.
So from R1, we've got a single connection
going to a single service provider router. We've only got that one WAN edge router, R1.
We've got a single core distribution layer switch and our single access switches.
So if any one of those devices goes down, our PCs are going to lose connectivity. So no redundancy
there,
that's quite common
though for small branch offices where the cost of adding redundant devices wouldn't be justified. In larger
offices though, the cost will be justified because the cost of an outage would be more expensive.
So, we're going to want to have redundancy there.
The point of redundancy is to eliminate single points of failure.
So if any single device goes down, there's another device already in place which will take over.
So in the example you see on the slide now, we've got two WAN edge routers, R1 and R2, which
are connected to two service provider routers, SP1 and SP2, with separate links.
We've got a pair of core distribution layer switches and our access layer switches have got dual uplinks
going to them.
So if any of the service provider routers or the WAN edge routers, or the core distribution layer switches
goes down, or any of the links there go down, we still maintain connectivity.
Now, you might have noticed that we don't have redundancy
at the access layer. You see access layer switch 3 here,
if that goes down, then the PCs that are connected in will lose connectivity.
This is normal because desktop PCs typically just have one network card.
They can only connect into one switch anyway. An exception to this would be servers, which will often
have redundant NICs.
So for your servers, you'll usually put in redundant access layer switches.
But if an access layer switch goes down, it's only the PCs that are connected to that one switch which will
lose connectivity.
All of the other PCs in the building that are connected in different switches will still maintain connectivity.
If we compare that with the first slide, where if say, R1 or our core distribution layer switch went
down, everything in the building loses connectivity.
With the second example here, where we have built redundancy into the solution, we've got full redundancy on
our service provider links, our WAN edge routers, and our core distribution layer switches.
With the example topology I gave you,
we've got a clear demarcation point between Layer 3 and Layer 2. The links between our WAN edge routers,
R1 and R2, and going up to the service provider, they're all
Layer 3 links, meaning the interfaces have got IP addresses on them, and we're going to be running
routing. The downstream links from R1 and R2, the downstream devices from there are Layer 2 devices.
The core distribution layer switches for the example are going to be Layer 2 only.
The reason I've done this is because it makes it easier to explain and to understand if I've got a clear
boundary between Layer 3 and Layer 2.
But if this was a real world deployment, we probably would have deployed Layer 3 switches for our
core distribution layer switches. For everything I'm going to teach you during the section, that doesn't
really make any difference,
everything still applies.
It's just easier to understand what's going on with the routing and switching when we've got that clear
Layer 3 and Layer 2 boundary.
Okay, so in the example here, how are we going to configure the connectivity from our Wan edge
routers and going upstream and also down to our PCs?
Well, redundancy and failover are relatively easy to implement for Laye 3 routing.
If you look at our routes on R1 here, it's got a direct connection to the service provider
router at SP1. So, we'll have a default static route
pointing upstream there. So our route is 'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
the next hop address is the SP1 router at 203.0.113.1.
Now, we want redundancy in case the SP1 router or the link to the router goes down.
So we have a backup route for that, which is going to point to R2.
So if the connectivity to SP1 goes down from R1, we can send traffic to R2, which will
then send the traffic up to SP2.
So our backup route is also going to be a static default
route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0
and the next hop address is R2 at 10.10.20.2.
Now, on this backup route,
we give that a higher administrative distance of 5 because I don't want to load balance my Internet bound
traffic to SP1 and to R2
when I send it from R1. I want it to always go up the direct link to SP1, unless that goes
down and then I want to send it to R2.
So, I need to make the route to SP1 a more preferred route than the route to R2. The way I do that
is by manipulating the administrative distance.
So on the first route to SP1, I don't specify an administrative distance.
It's a static route, so the administrative distance will be 1. On the backup route going to R2, I specify
an administrative distance of 5.
The lower the administrative distance the better,
so the second route with an AD of 5 is only going to come into effect if the first one goes down.
If the link to SP1 goes down, then the router will automatically failover to using that backup
route.
For traffic going downstream to the PCs on the 10.10.10.0 network,
well, R1 has got an interface on the inside, gigabitEthernet0/1, which has got IP
address 10.10.10.2.
So it's already got an interface that is in that subnet,
so I don't need to configure a route.
However, if interface gigEth0/1 goes down, I want to have a backup route
going down to the PCs.
So that's why I have
'ip route 10.10.10.0 255.255.255.0', with a next hop address of 10.10.20.2.
Again, pointing over to R2.
I don't need to specify an administrative distance because the default administrative distance on a connected route
is zero.
It's always going to be the most preferred.
The default AD on a static route is going to be 1.
So this is going to be the backup route anyway, even without having to change the AD.
So, that's how we configure our routes and our backup routes on R1. On R2,
we're going to be doing the same configuration, except R2 will use SP2 as its preferred route
out to the Internet and R1 will be used for the backup
routes.
Okay, so that was our Layer 3 redundancy information, but we also need to worry about how
are the PCs going to send their traffic upstream and out to the Internet.
We're going to need to have redundancy configured there as well.
That's what we're going to discuss in the next lecture.